% Activity Analysis of *Night in the Woods*  
  English 391 Genre Analysis
% Leo Mansfield
% April 21, 2023

Summary: Night in the Woods is a video game with the Visual Novel and Exploration RPG genres. There are several stories told within: a coming-of-age story for Mae and her friends, a tragic struggle for the town as a whole, and an inspiring pro-union legacy from two generations ago.


  Night in the Woods is a story game starring Mae, in small-town Appalachia. The game is primarily made of character study and social commentary. The story structure is half backstory, and the current parts are about character growth for the main cast. Of course, the story is told in first person, so actual events do happen as you progress through the game. But the events that matter to the the town as a whole, all happened prior to the beginning of the story. Thus, the backstory is itself a separate and equally important story. The backstory is revealed throughout the game, so it's like we're being told the current story linearly, and the backstory non-linearly. In the current story, characters are defined by their everyday behaviour. In the backstory, they're defined by how they relate to past events.

  One of the curious impacts of this story structure, on gameplay, is that the activities and minigames you play in the game, don't 'matter' to the story. Most of the actions Mae takes in-story, don't have any tangible impact. Their real purpose is *making meaning* by connecting to her community. This also serves as a reminder to the player, to reflect on what meaning you make for yourself, in this game and outside of it. The game's catchphrase, "At the end of everything, hold on to anything," describes this pursuit of finding what is meaningful, for yourself.

  This is a linear, single-player story game, and it doesn't gate story outcomes behind challenging gameplay. Meaning, for the player, doesn't need to come from succeeding at anything. It could come from emotionally investing in the characters, or from curiosity for the culture, or from relating to the issues that the characters live with. However, many players have developed habits from other games, of pursuing challenge, success, and completion. It seems like the game developers wanted to allow for those types of meaning as well, but they deliberately limited it, so you wouldn't stumble upon it if you didn't already know about it. I'll discuss two game genre sets that Night in the Woods has, and how the developers have limited the amount that habits of play or reward-seeking from these genres can 'take over' and quash the deeper meaning-making that players might miss out on if they don't pay attention to their own feelings.

  The chapters and dialog options are structured like a visual novel. Most scenes will happen regardless, but after band practice, you get the to hang out with one of Mae's friends, one-on-one. You only experience one hangout, and miss out on the others. A fresh player will not particularly notice this, but many visual novel players are driven to experience every version of the story. Visual novels tend to make that easy with a 'chapter select' or even a tree of options, so that you can undo events and try alternatives. Night in the Woods does not provide such an option, so you have to stick with the choices you've made, and resolve to try the alternate version on a second playthrough, if you're still invested by then. This forces the visual novel player to consider whether they actually want to see all the alternatives, overriding their habits. Game modder IncogniStructura created a chapter select by generating a directory of save files for every point in the game, on each alternate path. They originally created it because players were losing their save files and didn't want to restart from the beginning, but I'm sure people also use it for skipping around when re-playing the game.

  Separate from the main story, there are also plenty of optional side stories, being told by and with other people in town. Some of these are prompted directly, such as the characters sitting on their porches, waiting for you to say hello. But while you're talking to them, you might notice squirrels climbing the power cables and decide to try climbing them, yourself. Eventually, you'd find others who were also drawn to such heights. Exploration RPG players will notice that Mae's journal, in addition to recording what was important to Mae, also functions as an 'achievement' tracker. These achievements are meaningful in other games because they represent actual successes, so many players are driven to collect them all. However, they are meant to be fun in NITW. You can get an achievement for playing the bass perfectly, but you can also get an achievement for playing dreadfully. The journal system limits this completionist goal by only showing the achievements that you already have. If you want to complete all the achievements, you'll have to go outside the game to find a list of them, which isn't rewarding to most people. Some will even use a mod to automatically play the rhythm game perfectly, because they still want to get all the achievements even if it's too hard to earn them.

  I've been sucked in by the completion-seeking in these games before, so I noticed these options and was pleased that they were so artfully subtle about it. I didn't want to complete everything, but I could that if I *did* want to, I'd have to want it overmuch, to overcome these subtle barriers.

  Another way that the game prompts the player to think about how they want to enjoy the game, is with the minigames. Throughout the story, you'll do impulsive things with your friends, such as sneaking into a water feature to spray people, or play-fighting with knives. A feature of these minigames, that most games avoid, is that you can only play them once, and it doesn't matter how well you do. The minigames are just little novelty toys, put down once you've figured them out. One particular player, Animals Aren't Real, decided to add to the communal understanding of the game. They posted a guide to a secret achievement: breaking Gregg's knife, so that he takes out an orange-colored one to continue the play-fight. This was a hoax, but it apparently had such wide reach that a developer was convinced someone on the team must have programmed it. Highly invested participants generally didn't play every path, but watched others play them. In a way, this hoax *actually added to the game,* by adding a new option to people's understanding of what they can do in the game. From this perspective, that a game includes all the related media that fans associate with it, Night in the Woods has a not-insignificant reach into fanart and fanfiction. Also, a modder named jessicrr ported the songs into a better rhythm game called Friday Night Funkin', and even made new sprites for it! The soundtrack received many awards, so porting them to a high-quality rhythm game adds significantly to the experience of playing the bass at band practice. The characters are complex and excellently written, and leave the player wanting to see more, so these fan works fill that gap.

  Now that we've gone over the early gameplay, I'd like to talk about the backstory and the place the game is situated in. The town is a former mining town in Appalachia region, which is well-known for coal-mining monopolies and unionisation wars. Mae can choose to explore her grandfather's history as a young miner who stood up to the company. The game makes it clear that the problems of predatory corporations in these towns hasn't really gone away. Mae goes out and listens to tales of her grandfather knocking the teeth out of his boss at the mines, then comes home to her father complaining about his own dead-end job. She's able to share the stories with her dad to cheer him up, but it's clear nobody has a solution. The town council does their best, but in this story, it's a pointless and outdated struggle. The game is very positive about our need for community support and flourishing, and presents modern capitalism as a barrier to it. It stops *just* short of outright calling for revolution, which I think they only didn't mention because they wanted to emphasise how hopeless and depressive this decay feels. Overall, they did a great job adding emotional salience to the political messaging, without needing a strong call to action.

  I've gone through the positive aspects of the game, which I enjoyed. Now I'd like to talk about the final chapter, which disappointed me. The ending sequence starts at Halloween, where Mae steps outside for a breath of fresh air and spots someone being kidnapped. She chases the kidnapper out to the abandoned grocery store, and he disappears around a corner before she spots him on the other side of a fence. This seems plainly impossible, to her, so she concludes it's a ghost. The story takes on a new genre, a specific kind of mystery sometimes referred to as 'teens on bikes,' where the detectives have few resources and no adults to help them, so they have to bike around after school to solve it. This fits into a greater sense that Mae's story is of the coming-of-age genre set, with the twist that Mae is an adult who failed to launch (to the extent that some people her age don't see her as a peer, such as when Dan calls her an immature kid). I was anticipating this transition gladly, because now she has a concrete goal. What disappointed me, is that it didn't actually become a functional mystery, because they didn't have any clues to go off of. Mae just says they're going ghost hunting, and her friends humour her. Before, the lack of stakes made the pointless minigames fun. Now that there is real stakes, it's frustrating that they just stumble around, until eventually the kidnapper shows up unprompted, and they get involved with a creepy cult. Now, I can see that there is something I'm missing. There are many allusions in this sequence to Mae's mental health struggles, so there's certainly much to empathize with, if you relate to Mae. The cult, trying to solve the town's decay in a pointless superstitious way, is a metaphor for Mae trying to dispel the paranoia in her own head by going on an aimless quest for a ghost. This chapter didn't work for me. They set up a detective story in the actual world, and then treated it like it was Mae's personal problem. The one part I did find poignant, is that at the end of the story, they had dealt with the immediate issue but didn't even think about the consequences for the next day. Just like they had dealt with Mae's episode, but weren't considering the long-term consequences of how they should protect her mental health in future. There's a storm coming, but at least they have each other. It turns out, that is all they need.



# Citations

[Where is Possum Springs?](https://www.reddit.com/r/NightInTheWoods/comments/p4mf2b/where_is_possum_springs_my_analysis_of_a/), by cold-depths. 2022. reddit.com

[ZeroProject chapter select](https://www.reddit.com/r/NightInTheWoods/comments/8gd9te/zeroproject_a_night_in_the_woods_online_save/), by IncogniStructura. 2019. reddit.com

[PerfectBandPractice](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=1833253016), by irl foxgirl. 2019. steamcommunity.com

[Band Practice for Friday Night Funkin'](https://fridaynightfunking.fandom.com/wiki/Band_Practice), by jessicrr. 2021. gamebanana.com

[Scott Benson’s Knife Easter Egg](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=975361282), by Animals Aren’t Real. 2017. steamcommunity.com

[Me and some folks on the NITW modding Discord did some digging and found out that that "Easter Egg" in Gregg's Knife fight during Wounds doesn't actually exist](https://www.reddit.com/r/NightInTheWoods/comments/n99h4g/me_and_some_folks_on_the_nitw_modding_discord_did/), by Rocker26a. 2022. reddit.com

